---
title: "Celebrating Academic Excellence: Recap of Our Enriching Doctoral Colloquia"
date: 2023-08-25

# Set to true to display this item on the home page
featured: true

---
Last semester, our brilliant doctoral candidates came together to
participate in a series of enlightening and collaborative doctoral
colloquia. These gatherings served as an exceptional platform, fostering the
exchange of cutting-edge research, innovative ideas, and cultivating a
strong sense of camaraderie among these budding scholars. We're thrilled to
acknowledge the resounding success of these colloquia, which have been an
integral part of the Horizon Europe TERAIS project.

<!-- more -->

From exploring the conundrums of applied informatics to diving deep into the
realms of cognitive science, our doctoral candidates showcased their
dedication and expertise in diverse research fields. The colloquia not only
provided them a platform to present their work but also encouraged vibrant
discussions, helping them to refine their research projects through
constructive feedback. Getting to know fellow researchers from various
research areas was an added bonus, creating an environment that enriched
their academic journey and expanded their horizons.

{{< youtube id="shq-MCiXnow"
   title="Applied Informatics Colloquium at Comenius University Bratislava" 
   class="embed-responsive embed-responsive-16by9 my-3" >}}

A heartfelt shoutout goes to our exceptional doctoral candidates and other
colleagues, whose tireless dedication and remarkable contributions have
elevated these colloquia to new heights and made these colloquia a
resounding success. The common commitment to pushing the boundaries of
knowledge and enthusiasm for sharing insights have been truly inspiring.
Your collective efforts have laid the foundation for an environment of
academic excellence and growth at the UKBAâ€™s Department of Applied
Informatics.

As we reflect on the success of the past semester, we look forward to
embarking on a journey of even greater learning, sharing, and growing
together. We are excited to witness the further evolution of these colloquia
as they contribute to the advancement of research and the development of a
collaborative, knowledge-driven community at UKBA.

Here's to a future brimming with discoveries, accomplishments, and the
unwavering spirit of exploration!
